add openvino VLM blog post (#3071)
huggingface/blog: openvino-vlm.md

### Option 1: Weight Only Quantization

Weight-only quantization means that only the weights are quantized but activations remain in their original precisions. As a result, the model becomes smaller and more memory-efficient, improving loading times. But since activations are not quantized, inference speed gains are limited. Weight-only quantization is a simple first step since it usually doesn’t result in significant accuracy degradation.

> [!NOTE]
> Since OpenVINO 2024.3, if the model's weight have been quantized, the corresponding activations will also be quantized at runtime, leading to additional speedup depending on the device.

In order to run it, you will need to create a quantization configuration `OVWeightQuantizationConfig` as follows:

```python
from optimum.intel import OVModelForVisualCausalLM, OVWeightQuantizationConfig

q_config = OVWeightQuantizationConfig(bits=8)
q_model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, quantization_config=q_config)
q_model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_int8")
```

or equivalently using the CLI:

```bash
optimum-cli export openvino -m HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct --weight-format int8 smolvlm_int8/
```

> ## Option 2: Static Quantization

Reviewer: I agree, in my opinion it would be better to use mixed config in this section. Performance numbers should be collected first though just to be sure.

q_model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_static_int8")
```

or equivalently with the CLI:

```bash
optimum-cli export openvino -m HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct --quant-mode int8 --dataset contextual --num-samples 50 smolvlm_static_int8/
```

Quantizing activations adds small errors that can build up and affect accuracy, so careful testing afterward is important. More information and examples can be found in [our documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/openvino/optimization#pipeline-quantization).

### Step 3: Run inference

You can now run inference with your quantized model:

```python
generated_ids = q_model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=500)
generated_texts = processor.batch_decode(generated_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)
print(generated_texts[0])
```

If you have a recent Intel laptop, Intel AI PC, or Intel discrete GPU, you can load the model on GPU by adding `device="gpu"` when loading your model:

```python
model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, device="gpu")
```

Try the complete notebook [here](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-intel/blob/main/notebooks/openvino/vision_language_quantization.ipynb).

> We also created a [space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/echarlaix/vision-langage-openvino) so you can play with the [original model](https://huggingface.co/echarlaix/SmolVLM2-500M-Video-Instruct-openvino) and its quantized variants obtained by respectively applying [weight-only quantization](https://huggingface.co/echarlaix/SmolVLM2-500M-Video-Instruct-openvino-8bit-woq) and [static quantization](https://huggingface.co/echarlaix/SmolVLM2-500M-Video-Instruct-openvino-8bit-static). This demo runs on 4th Generation Intel Xeon (Sapphire Rapids) processors.

Author: TODO @echarlaix upgrade space to CPU XL before blog release

We ran a benchmark to compare the performance of the PyTorch, OpenVINO, and OpenVINO 8-bit weight-only quantized (WOQ) versions of the (SmolVLM2-256M)[https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct] model. The goal was to evaluate the impact of weight-only quantization on latency and throughput on Intel CPU hardware. For this test, we used a single image as input.

We measured the following metrics to evaluate the model's performance:
- Model Size: this shows how much storage space the model requires.
- Latency: we measured the average time it took for the model to process an input.
- Image throughput: the rate at which the model can process images.
- Tokens throughput: the rate at which the model can process tokens.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenVINO/documentation/resolve/main/blog/openvino_vlm/flower.png" alt="Pink flower with bee" width="700"/>
</p>

Here are the results on Intel CPU:

> | Configuration    | first_generate latency     | prefill latency     | decode latency   | generate latency    | prefill throughput   | decode throughput    | generate throughput  |

Author: what is "first_generate latency" and should we keep or can we remove ? (looks like it's related to warmup https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-benchmark/blob/b263af468a9e9a9a3d1449039849727352955646/optimum_benchmark/scenarios/inference/scenario.py#L206 ?) cc @IlyasMoutawwakil

Author: very clear thanks, removing in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/3071/commits/77ea0cdadd64ad678c4bb13d8e18cdedea36976c

---
title: "Get your VLM running in 3 simple steps"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/optimum_intel/intel_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: ezelanza
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: echarlaix
- user: helenai
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: nikita-savelyev-intel
  guest: true
  org: Intel
---

> # Get your VLM running in 3 simple steps

Reviewer 2: Adding it :)

> Teaser: Run a Vision Language Model (VLM) locally in three steps, no need for expensive cloud infrastructure or high-end compute devices. SmolVLM + Intel Optimum + OpenVINO makes it possible to accelerate on an iGPU or an NPU.

Reviewer 3: Unfortunately I do not think we support NPU for VLMs with optimum-intel.

Reviewer 2: Exactly, I will remove this and also from the table.

As large language models (LLMs) and chatbots become more capable, AI is moving beyond text; it's now interpreting images and videos as well. This is where Vision Language Models (VLMs) come in, enabling tasks like describing scenes, generating captions, or answering questions about images.

> Early models like [Flamingo](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14198) and [Idefics](https://huggingface.co/blog/idefics) showed what was possible, both demonstrated capabilities with 80B parameters. More recently, we’ve seen small models emerge, [PaliGemma 3B](https://huggingface.co/google/paligemma-3b-pt-896?utm_source=chatgpt.com) , [moondream2](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/blog/2024/03/introducing-moondream2-a-tiny-vision-language-model/?utm_source=chatgpt.com) , and [Qwen2-VL models](https://nodeshift.com/blog/how-to-install-qwen2-5-vl-7b-instruct-locally?utm_source=chatgpt.com)   but even these “small” versions can be tough to run locally because they still carry a lot of the memory and compute demands from their larger predecessors.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Early models like [Flamingo](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14198) and [Idefics](https://huggingface.co/blog/idefics) showed what was possible. Both demonstrated interesting capabilities, using 80B parameters. More recently, we’ve seen much smaller models emerge, like [PaliGemma 2 (3B)](https://huggingface.co/google/paligemma2-3b-pt-224), [moondream2 (2B)](https://huggingface.co/vikhyatk/moondream2), or [Qwen2.5-VL (7B)](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct), but even these “small” versions can be tough to run locally because they still carry a lot of the memory and compute demands from their larger predecessors.
```

Even if you don't agree with the URLs I suggested, let's at least remove the `?utm_source=chatgpt.com` query parameters, please 🙏

> That’s why running AI models locally is still a challenge, but also a huge opportunity. Local inference keeps your data private, gives you fast responses without internet latency, avoids cloud costs, and lets you run and tweak models offline, with full control.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Running AI models locally is still a challenge, but also a huge opportunity. Local inference keeps your data private, gives you fast responses without internet latency, avoids cloud costs, and lets you run and tweak models offline, with full control.
```

> That’s where tools like Intel [Hugging Face Optimum](https://docs.openvino.ai/2024/learn-openvino/llm_inference_guide/llm-inference-hf.html), OpenVINO, and the lightweight [SmolVLM](https://huggingface.co/blog/smolvlm) model come in. In this post, we’ll show you how to get a VLM running locally in just three simple steps, with no expensive hardware or GPUs needed (though it can also run on Intel GPUs).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That’s where tools like [Hugging Face Optimum](https://docs.openvino.ai/2024/learn-openvino/llm_inference_guide/llm-inference-hf.html), [OpenVINO](https://github.com/openvinotoolkit/openvino), and the lightweight [SmolVLM](https://huggingface.co/blog/smolvlm) model come in. In this post, we’ll show you how to get a VLM running locally in just three simple steps, with no expensive hardware or GPUs needed (though it can also run on Intel GPUs).
```

Reviewer 4: I'd clarify the target hardware here as well.

## What is a VLM

> Let’s first recap: A Vision Language Model (VLM) can understand both text and images. Instead of just reading or writing text, it can also “see” pictures, so you can ask it to describe a photo, answer a question about an image, or generate a caption. It’s like giving your LLM eyes.  

Reviewer 4: It sounds a bit repetitive to me after the intro, in my opinion it's already been established what an VLM is and that large ones are heavy. We can potentially link to [this post](https://huggingface.co/blog/vlms-2025) for people that want to dive deeper, and just focus on smolvlm here if that's what we are going to use as an example.

Launched by Hugging Face in July 2024, SmolVLM addresses the growing need for multimodal AI that runs locally without requiring high-end GPUs or cloud infrastructure. As vision-language models become essential in areas like accessibility, robotics, and on-device assistants, SmolVLM offers a path to efficient, privacy-preserving inference at the edge.  
Architecturally, SmolVLM pairs a lightweight vision encoder with a compact language decoder. This modular design enables it to interpret both images and text.

<figure style="width: 700px; margin: 0 auto;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/openvino/documentation/resolve/main/blog/openvino_vlm/smolvlm.png" width=700>
  <figcaption style="text-align: center;">
    SmolVLM architecture (<b><i>Source: <a href="https://huggingface.co/blog/smolvlm#what-is-smolvlm">SmolVLM - small yet mighty Vision Language Model</i></b></a>).
  </figcaption>
</figure>

It offers a lightweight, efficient solution for running image-and-text models directly on laptops or edge devices.

## Hugging Face Optimum

> As mentioned, SmolVLM offers a strong advantage for running multimodal models efficiently, but there’s still room for improvement. These models can be further compressed or optimized to run even more effectively on local devices. If you’ve tried optimizing a model by yourself, you probably know it’s not a trivial task.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Even though SmolVLM was designed for low-resource consumption, there’s still room for improvement. These models can be further compressed or optimized for your own hardware. However, if you’ve tried to optimize a model yourself, you probably know it’s not a trivial task.
```

This is where [Optimum Intel for OpenVINO](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/index) ([repo](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-intel)) comes in.  

> It acts as a bridge between Hugging Face libraries like [**Transformers**](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/index)**, [Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/index), [timm](https://huggingface.co/docs/timm/index), and [sentence-transformers](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers)**, and Intel’s optimization tools, making it easy to accelerate end-to-end pipelines on Intel hardware

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It acts as a bridge between Hugging Face libraries –including [**Transformers**](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/en/index)**, [Diffusers](https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/index), [timm](https://huggingface.co/docs/timm/index), and [sentence-transformers](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers)**–, and Intel’s optimization tools, making it easy to accelerate end-to-end pipelines on Intel hardware.
```

> Before using it the very first step is to install the library.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before using it, the very first step is to install the library.  
```

```bash  
pip install optimum-intel[openvino]  
```

By using Optimum with OpenVINO, you gain several benefits, like improving the inference time and lower memory/storage usage out of the box. But you can go even further: quantization can reduce the model size and resource consumption even more. While quantization often requires deep expertise, Optimum simplifies the process, making it much more accessible.

Let’s see how you can run SmolVLM then.

## Step 1: Convert your model to the OpenVINO IR

First, you will need to convert your model to the OpenVINO IR. There are multiple options to do it:

1. You can use the [Optimum CLI](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/openvino/export#using-the-cli)

```bash
optimum-cli export openvino -m HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct smolvlm_ov/
```

2. Or you can convert it [on the fly](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/openvino/export#when-loading-your-model) when loading your model:

```python
from optimum.intel import OVModelForVisualCausalLM

model_id = "HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct"
model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id)
model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_ov")

> ```

Reviewer 4: Do we want to establish a reference baseline about speed/memory at this point?

## Step 2: Quantization

Now it’s time to optimize the model for efficient execution using **quantization**. Quantization reduces the precision of the model weights and/or activations, leading to smaller, faster models.

Essentially, it's a way to map values from a high-precision data type, such as 32-bit floating-point numbers (FP32), to a lower-precision format, typically 8-bit integers (INT8). While this process offers several key benefits, it can also impact in a potential loss of accuracy.

<figure style="width: 800px; margin: 0 auto;">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/openvino/documentation/resolve/main/blog/openvino_vlm/quantization.png">
</figure>

> Optimum supports two main post-training quantization:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Optimum supports two main post-training quantization methods:
```

- Weight Only Quantization  
- Static Quantization

Let’s explore each of them.

### Option 1: Weight Only Quantization

> Weight-only quantization means that only the weights are being quantized and leaving the activation in their original precisions. To explain this process, let’s imagine preparing for a long backpacking trip. To reduce weight, you replace bulky items like full-size shampoo bottles with compact travel-sized versions. This is like weight-only quantization, where the model’s weights are compressed from 32-bit floating-point numbers to 8-bit integers, reducing the model’s memory footprint.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Weight-only quantization means that only the weights are quantized but activations remain in their original precisions. To explain this process, let’s imagine preparing for a long backpacking trip. To reduce weight, you replace bulky items like full-size shampoo bottles with compact travel-sized versions. This is like weight-only quantization, where the model’s weights are compressed from 32-bit floating-point numbers to 8-bit integers, reducing the model’s memory footprint.
```

However, the “interactions” during the trip, like drinking water, remain unchanged. This is similar to what happens to activations, which stay in high precision (FP32 or BF16) to preserve accuracy during computation.

> As a result, the model becomes smaller and more memory-efficient, improving loading times. But since activations are not quantized, inference speed gains are limited. Since OpenVINO 2024.3, if the model's weight have been quantized, the corresponding activations will also be quantized at runtime, leading to additional speedup depending on the device.

Reviewer 4: But we have just said activation quantization reduces precision, and we go back to considering weight-only quantization in the next paragraph. We can potentially include the new behaviour as a note a bit later, and encourage the user to test their use cases.

Reviewer 4: Also, is this referring to the calibration method explained below?

Weight-only quantization is a simple first step since it usually doesn’t result in significant accuracy degradation.  
In order to run it, you will need to create a quantization configuration using Optimum \`OVWeightQuantizationConfig\` as follows

```python
from optimum.intel import OVModelForVisualCausalLM, OVWeightQuantizationConfig

q_config = OVWeightQuantizationConfig(bits=8)
# Apply quantization and save the new model
q_model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, quantization_config=q_config)
q_model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_int8")
```

or quivalently using the CLI:

```bash
optimum-cli export openvino -m HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct --weight-format int8 smolvlm_int8/

```

## Option 2: Static Quantization

> When applying static quantization, quantization is applied on both weights and activations. For this a calibration step is needed in which a dataset subset is used in order to estimate the activations ranges. In the following example we are using 50 samples of the [contextual dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ucla-contextual/contextual_test) to perform this calibration step.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With static quantization, quantization is applied on both weights and activations. To minimize precision loss, we use a calibration step, running inference on a dataset subset to estimate the activation ranges. In the following example we use just 50 samples from the [contextual dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/ucla-contextual/contextual_test) to perform this calibration step.
```

Author: instead of saying that it's to minimize the precision loss that it's to estimate the activations quantization parameters as precisely as possible (will rephrase with something similar)

```python
from optimum.intel import OVModelForVisualCausalLM, OVQuantizationConfig

q_config = OVQuantizationConfig(bits=8, dataset="contextual", num_samples=50)
q_model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, quantization_config=q_config)
q_model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_static_int8")
```

> or quivalently using the CLI:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
or equivalently with the CLI:
```

```bash
optimum-cli export openvino -m HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct --quant-mode int8 --dataset contextual --num-samples 50 smolvlm_static_int8/
```

> Quantizing activations adds small errors that can build up and affect accuracy, so careful testing afterward is important. More information and examples can be found in [our documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/openvino/optimization#pipeline-quantization).

Reviewer 4: Also using a dataset as close to our task as possible, right?

### Step 3: Run inference

> You can now run inference with your quantized model :

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can now run inference with your quantized model:
```

```python
generated_ids = q_model.generate(**inputs, max_new_tokens=500)
generated_texts = processor.batch_decode(generated_ids, skip_special_tokens=True)
print(generated_texts[0])
```

If you have a recent Intel laptop, Intel AI PC, or Intel discrete GPU, you can load the model on GPU by adding `device="gpu"` when loading your model:

```python
model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, device="gpu")
```

Try the complete notebook [here](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-intel/blob/main/notebooks/openvino/vision_language_quantization.ipynb).

> 

Reviewer 4: I don't want to encourage more work to be done, but if you happen to have some order of magnitude information about the before and after (i.e. speed or memory with and without Optimum+OpenVINO), that could be cool to share.

> 

Author: very good point thanks @pcuenca , @ezelanza do you think this can be added ?

> 

Author: @ezelanza I think the idea here would be to include the pytorch model (loaded with transformers) and include it in the benchmark to see how it performs when compared with the openvino model

## Conclusion

Multimodal AI is becoming more accessible thanks to smaller, optimized models like **SmolVLM**, along with tools such as **Hugging Face Optimum** and **OpenVINO**. While deploying vision-language models locally still comes with challenges, this workflow shows that it's possible to run lightweight image-and-text models on modest hardware.

By combining quantization techniques with OpenVINO's inference engine, you can reduce memory and compute requirements significantly, making local deployment feasible for a wide range of applications. Whether you're experimenting, prototyping, or looking to deploy offline, this setup gives you a practical starting point.

As models and tooling continue to improve, so will the ability to run powerful multimodal systems without relying on the cloud.

## Useful Links & Resources
- [Notebook](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-intel/blob/main/notebooks/openvino/vision_language_quantization.ipynb)

> - [Try our Space](https://huggingface.co/spaces/echarlaix/vision-langage-openvino)

Reviewer 4: Oh, there's a Space! Let's embed/link to it much earlier in my opinion, and clearly state that it's running on Intel CPU.

> - Watch the webinar recording

Reviewer 4: No link here

Author: added in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/3076

- [Optimum Intel Documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum-intel/en/openvino/inference)

#### Notices and Disclaimers
Performance varies by use, configuration, and other factors. Learn more on the Performance Index site.

> Performance results are based on testing as of dates shown in configurations and may not reflect all publicly available updates. See backup for configuration details. No product or component can be absolutely secure. Your costs and results may vary. Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service activation.

Reviewer 4: I don't see any links to these references either.

## Evaluation and Conclusion

Multimodal AI is becoming more accessible thanks to smaller, optimized models like SmolVLM and tools such as Hugging Face Optimum and OpenVINO. While deploying vision-language models locally still presents challenges, this workflow shows that it's possible to run lightweight image-and-text models on multiple hardware.

We ran a benchmark to show the impact of weight-only quantization on a (SmolVLM2-256M)[https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct] model and how it performs on different Intel hardware. For this test, we used a single image.
We measured the following metrics to evaluate the model's performance:
- Model Size: this shows how much storage space the model requires.
- Latency: we measured the average time it took for the model to process an input.
- Image throughput: the rate at which the model can process images.
- Tokens throughput: the rate at which the model can process tokens.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenVINO/documentation/resolve/main/blog/openvino_vlm/flower.png" alt="Pink flower with bee" width="700"/>
</p>

Here are the results across different Intel hardware:

> | Device       | Model Size (MB) (Before/After) | Images Throughput (im/s) (Before/After) | First Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Second Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Latency (s) (Before/After) |

Author: @IlyasMoutawwakil I'd like to have your opinion on the benchmark (coming from [this notebook](https://github.com/huggingface/optimum-intel/blob/main/notebooks/openvino/vision_language_quantization.ipynb)), especially for the throughput, if you think it makes sense to keep / if there is anything that you think should be modified (also if we keep the first vs other tokens will add an explanation to make it clearer for users), let me know what you think! Also would make sense to add the torch model in the benchmark + replace the quantized model (using the static quantized model instead of the WOQ model) 
also cc @ezelanza @nikita-savelyevv who worked on this to have their opinion as well

> | Device       | Model Size (MB) (Before/After) | Images Throughput (im/s) (Before/After) | First Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Second Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Latency (s) (Before/After) |

Reviewer 5: I think the benchmark is good but could be further optimized.
Minor:
- "Latency" should be "end-to-end latency"
- We should explain the before / after (is the before pytorch or openvino ?)
- I think the images throughput is not very clear, does it only account for vision encoder ?
Major:
- reporting first token throughput is counter intuitive, we talk more about time to first token (prefill latency)
- throughput metrics are generally confusing without enough context, for example it must be clearly stated that the batch size is 1 (I assume) or indicate that we are talking about single-query throughput.

Overall I think we should follow best practices when reporting LLM performance metrics and report TTFT (Time To First Token) Latency, Decode TPS (Tokens Per Second), E2E (End To End) Latency.
Throughputs are very easy to game with batching, like providers and serving frameworks reporting 1000 t/s (concurrent users / batched inference) while single query/user throughput is around 100 t/s 😅. In the case of CPU/iGPU or local inference in general, it is more interesting to report latencies (and ofc single-query decoding throughput) because they are the most important for the end users ; how long does my chatbot take before it starts streaming tokens, and what's the speed of the streamed response.

---
title: "Get your VLM running in 3 simple steps"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/optimum_intel/intel_thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: ezelanza
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: helenai
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: nikita-savelyev-intel
  guest: true
  org: Intel
- user: echarlaix
- user: IlyasMoutawwakil
---

# Get your VLM running in 3 simple steps on Intel CPU/GPU

Teaser: Run a Vision Language Model (VLM) locally in three steps, no need for expensive cloud infrastructure or high-end compute devices. SmolVLM + Intel Optimum + OpenVINO makes it possible to accelerate on an iGPU or a discrete Intel GPU).

As large language models (LLMs) and chatbots become more capable, AI is moving beyond text, and can now understand images and videos as well. Vision Language Models (VLMs) enable tasks like describing scenes, generating captions, answering questions about images, and many others.

> Early models like [Flamingo](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14198) and [Idefics](https://huggingface.co/blog/idefics) showed what was possible. Both demonstrated interesting capabilities, using 80B parameters. More recently, we’ve seen much smaller models emerge, like [PaliGemma 2 (3B)](https://huggingface.co/google/paligemma2-3b-pt-224), [moondream2 (2B)](https://huggingface.co/vikhyatk/moondream2), or [Qwen2.5-VL (7B)](https://huggingface.co/Qwen/Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct), but even these “small” versions can be tough to run locally because they still carry a lot of the memory and compute demands from their larger predecessors.

Author: good catch, thanks @merveenoyan

However, the “interactions” during the trip, like drinking water, remain unchanged. This is similar to what happens to activations, which stay in high precision (FP32 or BF16) to preserve accuracy during computation.

As a result, the model becomes smaller and more memory-efficient, improving loading times. But since activations are not quantized, inference speed gains are limited. Since OpenVINO 2024.3, if the model's weight have been quantized, the corresponding activations will also be quantized at runtime, leading to additional speedup depending on the device.

Weight-only quantization is a simple first step since it usually doesn’t result in significant accuracy degradation.  
In order to run it, you will need to create a quantization configuration using Optimum \`OVWeightQuantizationConfig\` as follows

```python
from optimum.intel import OVModelForVisualCausalLM, OVWeightQuantizationConfig

q_config = OVWeightQuantizationConfig(bits=8)
# Apply quantization and save the new model
q_model = OVModelForVisualCausalLM.from_pretrained(model_id, quantization_config=q_config)
q_model.save_pretrained("smolvlm_int8")
```

> or quivalently using the CLI:

Reviewer 2: Good catch! Solved

- Model Size: this shows how much storage space the model requires.
- Latency: we measured the average time it took for the model to process an input.
- Image throughput: the rate at which the model can process images.
- Tokens throughput: the rate at which the model can process tokens.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/OpenVINO/documentation/resolve/main/blog/openvino_vlm/flower.png" alt="Pink flower with bee" width="700"/>
</p>

Here are the results across different Intel hardware:

| Device       | Model Size (MB) (Before/After) | Images Throughput (im/s) (Before/After) | First Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Second Token Throughput (t/s) (Before/After) | Latency (s) (Before/After) |
|-------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| CPU         |  -             | 0.33 / 0.55                              | 2.69 / 3.94                                | 83.25 / 146.1                               | 3.5249 / 2.1548            |

> | iGPU        | -                             | 0.58 / 0.53                              | 5.01 / 5.26                                | 51.62 / 49.56                               | 2.1386 / 2.3182            |

Reviewer 3: Which CPU (and corresponding iGPU)? Can that be added? For example Intel Core Ultra 7 255U.

Reviewer 2: I was going to add this info after submitting the internal PCR

FYI, this is the hw used
```
System Board: MSI B860M GAMING PLUS WIFI (MS-7E42)
CPU: Intel® Core™ Ultra 7 265K
Sockets/Physical cores: 1/20 (20 threads)
HyperThreading/Turbo Settings: Disabled
Memory: 64 GB DDR5 @ 6400 MHz
GPU: 1x Intel® Graphics (4 Xe cores), 1x Intel® Arc™ A770 Graphics (32 Xe cores), 1x Intel® Arc™ B580 Graphics (20 Xe cores)
NPU: Intel® AI Boost
TDP: 665W
BIOS: American Megatrends International, LLC. 2.A10
BIOS release date: 28.11.2024
OS: Ubuntu 24.10
Kernel: 6.11.0–25-generic
```

We ran a benchmark to compare the performance of the PyTorch, OpenVINO, and OpenVINO 8-bit weight-only quantized (WOQ) versions of the (SmolVLM2-256M)[https://huggingface.co/HuggingFaceTB/SmolVLM2-256M-Video-Instruct] model. The goal was to evaluate the impact of weight-only quantization on latency and throughput on Intel CPU hardware. For this test, we used a single image as input.

We measured the following metrics to evaluate the model's performance:

- Time To First Token (TTFT) : Time it takes to generate the first output token.

> - Time Per Output Token (TPOT): Time it takes to generate all subsequent output tokens.

Author: thanks fixed in https://github.com/huggingface/blog/pull/3071/commits/57f4a34497dc50729031c8d0ec47c696bf1c5a60
